[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. We're
moving to set up abstract algebra,
and we've outlined some challenges that modern
treatment faces. This is our third challenge:
the "fundamental dream of algebra," which is
usually known as the "fundamental theorem of
algebra." Unfortunately, this is not really a
theorem currently. This is a very big topic;
it has huge implications throughout mathematics,
so it's a very foundational kind of issue and
completely appropriate for this playlist, this
channel, where we're dealing with foundational
issues. So the fundamental theorem of algebra—we
have to address some unpleasant, uncomfortable
truths about this very important and interesting
result, but it's logically problematic.
Okay, so it's a fundamental result or claim
from undergraduate mathematics, and in fact,
there are a couple of different forms of the
fundamental theorem. I’d like to distinguish
between them by calling the first one the
fundamental theorem of algebra number one.
It is that every polynomial P(x) equals a₀ +
a₁x + ... + aₙxⁿ (so this is a polynomial in
x of degree n greater than or equal to one,
so there's at least a single x appearing
somewhere) has a complex zero, R = a + bi.
What does that mean? It means that P(R) = 0,
so it means that if you have a non-constant
polynomial, then you can find a complex number
so that when you substitute that complex number
in for the x, then the total result is zero.
Okay, now we have to understand that these
coefficients that are appearing here are usually
taken to be real numbers, and the a and the b
appearing here in this description of complex
numbers are also taken to be real numbers. Now,
that, of course, is hugely problematic because
there are all kinds of difficulties, as we've
seen, with the theory of real numbers. So that's a
big part of the problem, but there's more as well.
So this is the first version of the fundamental
theorem: that every non-constant polynomial
has a complex number zero or root.
And now here is the second version, or alternate
version, of the fundamental theorem of algebra,
which asserts that a polynomial of degree
at least one can be factored as a product of
linear factors if we're allowing ourselves
complex coefficients. So it says that we
can find complex numbers R₁, R₂, up to Rₙ
(where n is the degree of the polynomial),
and a lambda real number so that the
polynomial is actually equal to lambda
times the factor (x - R₁) times the factor (x
- R₂) all the way up to the factor (x - Rₙ),
and these numbers are the zeros or the roots of
the polynomial. Clearly, if we replace x with,
say, one of these R's, say R₁, then one of
these terms will be zero, and so the whole
product will be zero. And as before here, all
these coefficients are generally real numbers,
although it turns out that there's a somewhat
more general version of this theorem which
extends the same statements to the case where the
coefficients are not just so-called real numbers
but are in fact more general complex numbers
themselves, and the theorem still holds true.
So some of the ways that the fundamental theorem
of algebra ends up being used in undergraduate
mathematics are through the consequence that if
you have a real polynomial, then you can deduce
that it factors into a product of linear and
quadratic factors, all of whose coefficients
are real numbers. So even if you're a little bit
unhappy about or unfamiliar with complex number
arithmetic, a consequence of this is that if you
have an arbitrary polynomial with so-called real
coefficients, or maybe rational coefficients,
then you could write it as a product of linear
and quadratic factors all with real or possibly
rational coefficients, typically real. That has
a lot of applications; for example, it's used
a lot to justify certain integration formulas
using the idea of partial fractions. So it's
a key tool in the theory of integration,
and it also allows all kinds of solutions to
various problems like recurrence relations,
differential equations, eigenvalue problems,
problems coming from combinatorics involving
generating functions, and other things too. So
there are quite a lot of situations where we
need to find zeros of polynomials or we need
to factor polynomials, and it's always the
fundamental theorem that is the workhorse that
lets us assert such zeros or factorizations.
But it's not just pure mathematics that uses this
kind of thinking. A lot of applied mathematics
leans very heavily on the fundamental theorem of
algebra. So there's a wide variety of problems
coming from physics, engineering, chemistry,
and also economics and industry that one way
or the other need to extract zeros of polynomials
and factorization. So here's a picture of a bunch
of springs that separate masses M₁, M₂, M₃, and
M₄, and they're allowed to oscillate this way
because they're these springs, and they have
different masses, and you might be interested
in understanding how these coupled oscillators
behave, okay? And that's a kind of problem that
once you set it up in physics involves these
kinds of polynomials that have to be solved.
There's a wide variety of such problems; for
example, Google's PageRank algorithm has some
connection with this—neural nets, stress
matrices, rotations—you can give a very,
very long list of real-life applications,
ultimately, of the fundamental theorem of
algebra. So it's not just a theoretical tool; it's
also very important for practical applications.
Now, for us, we're interested in setting up
abstract algebra, and so we have made the point
that in abstract algebra also, these theorems
play a very important role. So, for example,
the fundamental theorem really underpins
character theory for groups. So, if you want to
study group theory, non-commutative finite group
theory, there's a theory of characters, and the
fundamental theorem is intimately connected with
that theory. It's also the basis for much of field
theory. When we set up fields and look at concrete
examples of fields, and especially the associated
area called Galois theory, the fundamental theorem
and its role are so intimately woven into this
theory. It's very important for the structure
theory of matrices—matrices and the fundamental
theorem of algebra are intimately connected. For
example, Jordan canonical form and eigenvalue
problems are all associated with this. But
it has a role in abstract algebra; algebraic
number theory is very much relying on this kind
of thinking of the fundamental theorem because
it tries to embed a lot of the fields and rings
that occur in number theory into complex numbers,
and that's essentially playing this game.
It also underpins the importance of complex
algebraic geometry. In algebraic geometry, we
study curves and higher-dimensional extensions
called varieties, and for various technical
reasons, one likes to work over the complex
numbers rather than more natural intuitive
sort of rational or real numbers. And a lot
of the reason for that is because invoking
the fundamental theorem makes a lot of things
easier. This is a very common orientation in
algebraic geometry, again, ultimately coming
down to the fundamental theorem. So this is
a very important result for undergraduate and
higher mathematics. It figures prominently in a
wide range of mathematics and also applications
to applied mathematics, but for us, it also
has a major input into abstract algebra.
So how sad is it that, in fact, these theorems
are actually seriously logically flawed? It's
very unfortunate, and it's something
that people, I know, would rather not
hear and would rather not learn about. They
would like to pretend that things are okay,
but they are not, in fact, okay. Today,
there are serious problems, and in fact,
these theorems have to be recast, they have
to be rethought, and there's a lot of very,
very important work and opportunities for young
people to come and to help in reconfiguring the
mathematics around the fundamental theorem of
algebra. So we're going to be talking about that.
So unfortunately, the reality is that the
fundamental theorem of algebra parts 1 & 2
that we've discussed are actually dreams.
Currently, they are not real theorems—they
are dreams. They are the result of wishful
thinking and insufficient attention paid
to rigor and careful analysis. There are many
proofs of the fundamental theorem of algebra,
and this was already one indicator of the logical
difficulties that the subject has. So many people
have come along and tried to pin down, first
of all, what this theorem is really about and
then provide some kind of argument for it. Many
people have thought that they have an argument,
and then later generations come along and say,
"Well, wait a minute, he was actually assuming
something rather there, and that's not entirely
justified," and then they give a new proof,
and then some decades later, someone comes
along and states the same thing about their
arguments. This has been going on for a long
time, going back probably first to D'Alembert,
and Euler prominently was also very interested
in the fundamental theorem, and then Lagrange,
Galois, Cauchy, and Weierstrass. It's like a
who's who of famous mathematicians who tried
to understand what was really going on with this
fundamental theorem to try to provide proofs. And
it didn't stop with Weierstrass; many 20th-century
authors have also contributed new proofs. In fact,
Gauss contributed to probably half a dozen proofs.
So he proved it, and then he would wait a few
years and then come up with another proof. And
this probably gets him recognized that there was
something not quite solid; there was a need for
further understanding because this topic touches
base with what I think is really the fundamental
problem in mathematics, which is the nature of the
continuum. And I'll talk about that more in my
next video, but the nature of the continuum is
actually a very subtle issue, and it's intimately
connected with the fundamental theorem of algebra.
And so mathematicians have wrestled with this
for a long time, and I'm claiming that in fact,
unfortunately, all of these proofs or attempted
proofs are incomplete or wrong. Unfortunately,
they don't really work. So even the current
statements of the theorems are faulty,
and you can see that in a simple way because if
you have a theorem that rests crucially on real
numbers and you don't have a proper theory of real
numbers, well, then obviously you're in strife,
and the fact that we don't have a proper theory
of real numbers almost immediately implies that
there's going to be problems with things like the
fundamental theorem of algebra that crucially rely
on properties of real numbers. But in fact, we
can see the problems in a much more direct way.
So mathematics is not just about
theorizing and making abstract theories;
it's also about examples, explicit examples,
and concrete computations, and we don't want
to divorce ourselves from contact with these
explicit examples and concrete computations. So,
for example, most undergraduates don't really
see a proper proof of this fundamental theorem
of algebra, even though they use it in
many, many, many places until perhaps in
a third-year complex analysis course. So
there's usually a place somewhere after
you've done the real analysis where the proof
is presented, but it's almost always not very
convincing to your typical undergraduate. They
go, "Okay, now I have some abstract argument
which I probably don't really believe," but
if there were really a convincing argument,
then that convincing argument could be supported
by examples, right? So we give the argument,
and then we can say, "And here, by the way, guys,
here are some examples of how it actually works."
But unfortunately, the fundamental theorem
of algebra falls down as soon as you start
looking at examples. You don't have to go very
far, and you see that, wait a minute, there is
some divergence between the claims that are made
and what actually happens in concrete situations.
Let me illustrate. Here is an example—there's
nothing particularly special about this example.
P(x) = x⁵ - 2x + 3. That's a polynomial of
degree 5; it has, in this case, integer entries,
so it's particularly simple. We can graph it, or
at least we can graph part of it. So it has some
kind of shape like this for values, say, between
-3 and 3. We can see that it crosses the x-axis
seemingly somewhere around here between -1 and -2.
It goes up here, has a little maximum there, then
down to a minimum, and then it goes on together,
okay? So what's the claim here? The claim is,
first of all, that this thing has a zero. We can
see that without using the fundamental theorem of
algebra; we can see it from the picture, can't we?
And we're going back now to Newton's method—Newton
can see that there's a zero there, and to evaluate
that zero, he can create this algorithm that will,
well, not actually give you the zero but will
give you a sequence of approximations that will
give you points on the x-axis that are closer and
closer to having the property that P(x) is zero.
So we've talked about Newton's method, which is
very important, at some length earlier in this
series. So the Math Foundations 83 up to 86, my
lectures, are all about that, and they give you a
way of successively creating a sequence of values
that are closer and closer to where this function
ostensibly crosses the x-axis. So it certainly
suggests—the picture suggests—that yes, there's
some point, but in fact, the actual logical
structure of that statement is not at all obvious.
It's not at all obviously clear that we understand
continuity well enough to really be able to assert
that there actually is an exact value of x for
which this polynomial takes on the value 0.
Okay, but I can get my computer, I can set this
equal to 0, and I can ask my computer to solve it,
and it will do so at least up to a certain
resolution that I can input beforehand. So if
I ask it, say, for eight decimal places, something
like that, then it will tell me that a zero or a
solution to P(x) = 0 is, say, given by -1.4236058.
That, according to my computer, is a solution to
the equation P(x) = 0. In other words, that's a
root or a zero of the polynomial. Great. But if
I want to check and I actually take this exact
value and plug it in here and get my computer
to evaluate that, it does not give me zero.
It evaluates it again to eight decimal places
as 8.9999626 x 10⁻⁷. That's a relatively small
quantity, but it's definitely not zero, all right?
Then I can up the resolution, so I can go into my
program and ask it to evaluate things not to eight
decimal places but to maybe 16 decimal places
or something like that. Okay, so I've done that,
and I've asked it again to solve P(x) = 0, and
it's come up with a better value. So here's the
same kind of thing as we had before, but now
we have some more digits. So is this the right
answer? Well, it's a better answer; at least
it's more accurate. If we plug this, however,
into the polynomial and actually evaluate it,
our computer will tell us that we get something
that is about -4.8376541 x 10⁻²⁰. But it's not
exactly what we get—there are more digits here,
but this is to eight decimal places.
That's what we get. In particular,
we're not getting something that's zero. We're
getting something that's getting small because
that's 10⁻²⁰, so it's a very small quantity,
but it's definitely not zero. And this is
the reality of it, again—this is the reality
that yes, you can get more and more digits,
and so you're getting closer and closer to
having a number that you can plug in here
to get zero, but you cannot actually
get such a number. You cannot get it.
So this is why discussions of this in
undergraduate texts are always kind of limited.
People don't want to explore this very clearly and
carefully because then undergraduates would start
to go, "Well, wait a minute, you're claiming that
there's a number that is a zero on this thing,
but you can't actually exhibit such a number, so
why should we believe the arguments? Maybe there's
some problem here." Well, yes, there is a problem,
okay? There's a very serious problem logically.
Alright, so here's my claim—Wildberger's
claim—but in direct contradiction to the
fundamental theorem of algebra part one: there
is, in fact, no number R in C satisfying P(R),
which is R⁵ - 2R + 3 = 0. I claim there is no
such number. This is in direct contradiction
to the fundamental theorem of algebra. I do
not dispute that there are complex numbers
that you could plug in here, and you would
get something that's close to zero. I do not
dispute that at all; I'm happy to believe
that. I'm happy to believe that you can
get values here for which this thing is some
very, very small complex number that's very,
very close to zero. But problem: you cannot find a
number R, a complex number R, such that P(R) = 0.
So this is a very direct claim, isn't it?
I mean, we're not talking about philosophy
here—it's not a question of opinion. It's
not something that someone can say, "Well,
I have an axiomatic position that says such
and such." I'm making a very direct claim about
the existence of a solution to a polynomial
equation, and I challenge any mathematician
to prove me wrong. And you can prove me wrong
by showing us a number R, a complex number R,
that I can then plug in and check. So you
can do whatever you like and use all kinds of
sophisticated cohomological theories if you like,
but at the end of it, you have to give me an R,
and I'm going to take that R and plug it
into P(R), and I'm going to see whether
or not your R actually works. And I claim
that it's not going to work. It's just not
going to work. And so the fundamental theorem
of algebra is incorrect. It is just not true.
Well, there will be people who will say, "Well,
wait a minute, Norman, I can exhibit such an R
for you. What you do is you start doing this
procedure, okay? You do this, and then you
do this, and then you do this, and you keep on
going to infinity, and at the end of infinity,
you will have such an R." So they will give us a
prescription for finding such an R that involves
an infinite number of steps. Now, I'm not able to
do an infinite number of steps, so I'm not happy
to be given such a prescription. But if someone
has such a philosophy towards finding such an R,
then I suggest that they themselves carry out
the infinite number of steps, and after they
have done so, then they can exhibit the end result
to us, alright? So I'm not interested in someone
telling me a procedure that will find such an R;
I'm interested in someone actually exhibiting such
an R directly. That's not going to happen. That's
why the fundamental theorem of algebra is wrong.
And for a very similar reason, the second version
of the fundamental theorem of algebra doesn't
work either. So if we take our same polynomial and
ask our computer for all of the complex zeros, it
will give us some answers. So it will give us the
number that we've already seen, and it will give
us also four other ones, which are not visible on
the graph that we drew, okay? They're not actually
corresponding to places where the graph crosses
the x-axis because we're talking about complex
values. But nevertheless, here are these complex
numbers that have a property that when you plug
them in, you get something that's very close to
being the complex number zero, like zero plus zero
i. But notice that these things here have the same
aspect as this one does. So I'm putting three dots
here now to represent the fact that my computer
actually has a range of possible things that it
can give me depending on the resolution level that
I've asked it for. It doesn't give me a unique
answer; it depends on how many digits I have asked
it to give me an answer for, so it's a little bit
open-ended. But nevertheless, there's something in
this direction—your computer will find something
in this direction as well. So there's this
one plus i, then the same values, really,
minus i. Now, these are called complex conjugate
pairs, and then there's another pair like this
involving these two numbers, plus and minus, and
here's a number, which are the coefficients of i.
Okay, so in the same way, this is very explicit,
really. If the fundamental theorem of algebra
part two really did work, then we could write
our polynomial as a product of linear factors,
and the linear factors would correspond exactly
to these five numbers. So we could form the
expression (x - R₁)(x - R₂)(x - R₃)(x - R₄)(x
- R₅), and you can do this. You can plug the
values that you had in—that will necessarily
mean making a choice. You know, your computer
will give you a certain number of digits, and
you will have to use that certain number of
digits in order to create these linear factors.
And then you can get your computer to evaluate
that product, and you will see that you have
a polynomial that is pretty close to this one,
in the sense that the difference between these
two polynomials is another polynomial with very
small coefficients—you know, the coefficients
are like 10⁻⁸ or 10⁻²⁰ or something like that.
So these things are very close to being the
same polynomial, but they're not actually the
same polynomial. The fundamental theorem
of algebra part two does not work either.
Now, does this render all those applications of
the fundamental theorem to physics and chemistry
and industry and so on wrong? No, not at all,
because the applied mathematician doesn't need the
pure form of the fundamental theorem. They only
need the approximate form. They only need to know
that we can find complex numbers such that this
thing is very close to this. They only need to
find a zero in the sense that we have some number
so that when we plug in, we get a number that is
very close to zero. To an engineer, if something
is zero to eight or twenty decimal places,
then it's effectively zero for them. They
don't care if theoretically it's not zero,
right? So the fundamental theorem of algebra is
always going to be an important and useful tool
for applied mathematicians. The question is, how
shall we pure mathematicians understand it? How
shall we think about what's really going on? This
is a huge challenge for modern mathematics and,
in fact, a challenge that has very, very
big ramifications for abstract algebra.
So we'll talk more next time about how we can
move forward on this challenge. What is the
fundamental theorem of algebra really? What can
we actually aspire to in terms of setting it up
correctly? I hope you'll join me for that.
I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music